Technology, Media & Telecommunications Practice

Why AI-enabled customer 
service is key to scaling telco 
personalization

Telcos increasingly rely on customized commercial marketing. But integrating those 
efforts with service-related outreach into a comprehensive next-best-experience 
engine is critical for growth.

This article is a collaborative effort by Lars Engel Nielsen, Lars Fiedler, Dominika Kampa, Stanislav Kucherenko, Julian Raabe, 
Tim Schenk, and Davide Schiavotto, representing views from McKinsey’s Technology, Media & Telecommunications Practice.

October 2023

A growing number of telcos are harnessing 
commercial next-best-action engines that use real-
time, data-based insights for objectives such as 
boosting cross-selling and upselling, reducing 
churn, improving retention, and acquiring new 
customers. But these marketing efforts are at risk 
of falling flat without predictive, proactive, and 
customized outreach about service-related issues 
and concerns. Put simply, customers frustrated 
with spotty connectivity or unexpectedly high bills 
are less likely to respond positively to a new offer 
or promotion.

To thrive in the challenging market ahead, with 
disruptive new technologies, digital-native 
competition, and rising customer expectations, 
creating a next-best-action engine for service 
issues is critical. But service is still just one piece of 
what could be a more comprehensive approach. 
Rather than trying to use two separate next-best-
action engines, telcos can work on integrating 
commercial and service-related capabilities into a 
single, comprehensive next-best-experience 
engine to communicate with customers in a highly 
personalized way—on the right issues, at the right 
time, and through the right channels.

In addition to the cascading benefits of superior 
customer experience, we estimate that within three 
years, this approach will allow operators to cut 
costs associated with certain use cases by up to 30 
percent, boost overall B2C revenues by 2 to 4 
percent, improve customer satisfaction by 10 to 20 
percent, and reduce early-life churn by as much as 
30 percent—on top of gains from ongoing 
commercial customer value management activities.

There is a potentially significant upside for early 
movers, which will set new standards for what 
customers can expect from their telcos. At the 
same time, operators that are slow to venture into 
this new frontier risk lagging further behind over 

the next three to five years as they struggle to 
satisfy customers’ evolving demands.

Service matters

Digital-native service and content providers are 
continually redefining customer expectations and, 
in the process, weakening telcos’ relationships with 
their customers. This dynamic contributes to the 
commoditization of connectivity, which raises the 
stakes of getting telecom service right. 
Understandably, there is a strong correlation 
between customer experience and retention—with 
overlap as high as 80 to 90 percent in some 
markets (exhibit). Even if a telco’s prices are the 
lowest available, customers reeling from poor 
customer experience, faulty connectivity, or 
surprise charges on their bills are unlikely to 
respond well to any marketing campaign.

Customers who spend long periods on hold, are 
transferred from agent to agent, or have to make 
multiple calls to resolve a single service issue are 
likely to remember the arduous process even if they 
ultimately get their desired outcome. One Western 
European telco discovered that customers who had 
to make two or more phone calls to resolve 
connectivity issues were almost twice as likely to 
walk away at the end of their contract.

Moreover, when telcos’ commercial and service 
capabilities operate in silos, as is generally the case, 
customers may be flooded with irrelevant, even 
irksome communications. As a result, some 
customers may go so far as to revoke their consent 
to receive marketing communications. One operator 
discovered that its various units were sending 
customers as many as five messages per week, 
with some customers receiving cross-selling offers 
and information about network outages within the 
same hour.

Why AI-enabled customer service is key to scaling telco personalization

2

An integrated next-best-experience engine that 
takes a holistic approach to personalization can not 
only substantially improve the experience of 

customers but also reduce the costs associated 
with serving them. This can be done by replacing 
reactive, inbound-focused customer interactions 

Exhibit

Why AI-enabled customer service is key to scaling telco personalization

3

with highly automated outreach that is both 
proactive and preemptive, and by ensuring that a 
telco speaks to its customers with one voice.

Driving the engine

The next-best-experience engine guides and 
powers all telco interactions with customers. It 
comprises four main layers: data, analytics, 
decisioning, and channel execution. Commercial 
and service-related factors are integrated into each 
layer, with every potential action a telco might take 
analyzed through the lens of customer lifetime 
value, a common metric for evaluating which action 
will generate the most value over the long term.

The data layer
The data layer should be the single source of truth 
for the entire engine, encompassing all data points 
that may be relevant for addressing the full 
spectrum of customers’ needs and desires. 
Commercial and service data, including data from 
external sources,1 gets combined with data on 
demographics and location to create a consistent 
360-degree view of each customer.

Commercial data might include tenure, historical 
receptivity to campaigns, customer satisfaction 
scores, and previous transactions. Service data 
might include network usage, network stability, 
device usage, and customers’ propensity to call 
regarding faulty service.

While telcos understand that data is critical, very 
few have developed a sophisticated data layer that 
stretches across the entire organization and covers 
all use cases. At most telcos, service and 
commercial divisions create and collect data 
separately. Service data is generally far less robust, 
in part because it is often generated by sensors and 
therefore requires a great deal of effort to extract, 

transform, and use effectively. Moreover, silos exist 
even within telcos’ commercial divisions; churn-
focused teams, for example, may compile and 
process data separately from teams focused on 
customer acquisition. This can duplicate work while 
limiting each team’s insight into customers’ 
attributes, demands, and behaviors.

Poor data governance also affects telcos’ ability to 
make the most of the data they possess. Telcos 
tend to lack clarity on data quality and where 
different types of data reside, and they often resort 
to less productive, manual (or semimanual) means 
of preparing data for further analytical work.

To create actionable, data-driven insights, 
automation is key. This requires clear data 
accountability standards and consistent naming 
conventions to ensure that data from multiple 
sources is labeled and organized similarly. With 
these measures in place, it’s possible to automate 
and streamline data-related work, accelerating the 
machine learning development process. Telcos can 
then create reliable data engineering pipelines that 
automate both underlying data manipulation 
routines and the process of creating features used 
in further modeling and decision making.

Operators have seen success in ensuring that their 
data lakes are rich reservoirs, rather than murky 
swamps, by appointing a chief data officer or head 
of data: a senior leader charged with overseeing all 
customer data, protecting it, and guaranteeing that 
its quality is as high as possible. This leader should 
be the go-to person for data-related questions 
from anywhere in the organization. They should 
have the authority to appoint a team to help them 
determine where data resides, evaluate its quality, 
understand how it’s structured and consumed, and 
monitor its use.

1 Subject to both internal data governance and architectural capabilities, as well as local regulations, legislation, and external data availability.

Why AI-enabled customer service is key to scaling telco personalization

4

One European telecom group’s experience 
illustrates the value that strategic data governance 
and data engineering can unlock. The group owns 
major telcos in several countries, with variable data 
and analytics maturity levels. To codify and share 
best practices, build economies of scale, and 
standardize and expedite service delivery, the 
group decided to create a single data and analytics 
center of excellence.

The group started by creating a common data 
model to serve as the foundation for analytical 
efforts across all countries. In nine weeks, it created 
a common abstraction layer linked to raw data in 
each country via standardized data manipulation 
and preparation routines. Analytical models were 
designed to work on top of this abstraction layer, 
making it easy to shift any model or use case from 
one country to another. The group expedited the 
timeline for deploying new “lighthouse” use cases 
from around five months to six weeks, with only two 
additional weeks required to deploy new use cases 
across multiple countries.

The analytics layer
The analytics layer can include a wide range of 
machine learning models for all potential use cases, 
including cross-selling, churn prevention, upselling, 
and three categories of service-related issues: 
preemptive (in which telcos detect an impending 
problem before it occurs), proactive (in which telcos 
detect and correct faults before customers notice 
them), and reactive (in which telcos engage with 
customers who contact them about an issue).

The central aim of this layer is to intervene as early 
as possible, ideally by preventing errors altogether. 
This minimizes the cost of rectifying issues and 
boosts customers’ perception of service quality.

Many telcos have machine learning models for 
commercial use cases such as churn and pricing. 
But very few have models for use cases such as 

broadband connection faults, bill shocks, and 
repeated failures. As a result, these issues are 
generally handled reactively instead of proactively. 
Even fewer telcos have integrated machine learning 
models for both commercial and service use cases. 
This is a missed opportunity, as it robs telcos of the 
ability to factor service-related issues into their 
decision making.

A Western European telco developed a predictive 
analytics model to identify customers who were 
most likely to call regarding fault-related issues and 
found that about 10 percent of customers were 
almost 80 percent more likely than others to call 
about faults. The telco then conducted a second, 
overlapping analysis to pinpoint the most easily 
resolvable faults—those that could be fixed 
remotely or by giving customers simple instructions 
on how to restart their router or change their 
network settings. At that point, the telco began a 
series of pilots, focusing on the 20 percent of 
customers most likely to call about quickly 
resolvable issues. In early pilots, customers 
received phone calls offering information about 
service outages and help fixing problems. Drawing 
on lessons from these early efforts, subsequent 
pilots offered end-to-end automated solutions, 
such as overnight remote router resets.

The telco reduced the costs associated with serving 
this group of customers by 35 percent, significantly 
boosting customer experience in the process.

The decisioning layer
While machine learning models determine the 
likelihood that certain events will occur or that 
customers will react in a certain way, the 
decisioning layer determines which use case to 
activate, when to activate it, and how to do so for 
each customer, depending on the situation or issue 
that arises. At this stage, leading telcos gain their 
competitive edge by delivering true personalization 
at scale.

Why AI-enabled customer service is key to scaling telco personalization

5

Each potential action (both service and commercial) 
should be assessed for how it will affect customer 
lifetime value. The decisioning layer factors in the 
expected long-term value from every possible 
action a telco might take, the likelihood of an 
individual customer taking certain actions (such as 
accepting a new offer or calling to complain about 
service), and the cost of serving the customer 
through each channel. Whenever a customer’s 
status changes—for example, when they migrate to 
a new plan, activate a new device, or start using a 
different channel—the decisioning model 
incorporates this new information when predicting 
customers’ responses and calculating the value and 
costs of each potential telco action.

Ultimately, the decisioning layer activates the use 
case that will generate the most value. If the model 
signals, for example, that a customer will likely leave 
the company, the churn-prevention use case may 
kick in. If a customer is deemed likely to place an 
inbound call, the proactive-service-support use 
case may be activated. The decisioning layer also 
covers telcos’ contact policies, guarding against 
campaign oversaturation and factoring in the 
chances that customers who are included in a 
particular campaign at a particular time will opt out 
of future communications.

To enable this level of responsiveness and 
personalization, customers are grouped into 
hundreds of microsegments for each potential use 
case, both commercial and service related. 
Microsegments are dynamic, responsive, and 
automatically updated, constantly evolving based 
on new data, insights, and customer behaviors. 
Historically, telcos’ commercial operations have 
grouped customers into ten to 15 relatively static 
segments, based on data related to such broad 
categories as demographics, usage, and tenure. 

Service operations have taken an even more 
rudimentary approach to segmentation, typically 
classifying customers into a few large groups 
according to the severity and frequency of the 
problems they experience.

By combining these two operations, telcos position 
themselves to respond to customers in a way that 
aligns with their most urgent priorities and 
concerns. If a high-value customer experiencing 
service problems, for example, were to be 
contacted proactively with an offer to send an 
engineer to their home, all marketing campaigns 
would be paused until the customer’s service issues 
were resolved.

The decisioning layer ideally includes three parallel 
flows: an always-on flow, which is the default; a 
regulatory flow, which is for communications that 
are legally required to be sent out regardless of 
commercial considerations; and a trigger-based 
flow, which is activated when circumstances 
change, necessitating a quick diversion from the 
machine learning model.

The regulatory flow is straightforward. It 
supersedes the other two flows, ensuring that 
telcos comply with all legal mandates (alerting 
customers two months before their contracts 
expire, for example). The trigger-based flow is 
activated when a customer’s situation suddenly 
changes, calling for a different action than the 
always-on flow would have suggested. If a 
customer, for instance, explores a section of the 
telco’s website with information about canceling 
contracts, the trigger-based flow might kick in to 
send offers enticing them to stay. If a customer 
explores information about iPhone upgrades, they 
may receive a text with upgrade offers. If they 
conduct a remote speed check on their broadband 
connection, they may receive an in-app message 
suggesting they reconnect their router.

Why AI-enabled customer service is key to scaling telco personalization

6

The trigger-based flow should include at most a 
dozen triggers to monitor and act on. This helps to 
reduce any risk of compromising the accuracy or 
efficiency of the always-on flow—which is 
continually integrating data on customer behavior 
to determine the optimal cadence and content for 
marketing campaigns. While creating a single 
always-on flow that responds to triggers in real 
time is possible, it is a complex and expensive 
endeavor; establishing parallel decisioning systems 
is an efficient work-around.

Occasionally, business priorities or brand-new 
information that the model has not yet integrated 
may prompt leaders to manually override the 
always-on flow. If a competitor enters a new region, 
for example, the business may prioritize broadband 
repairs or offers in that specific region rather than 
the actions suggested by the always-on flow.

There may be a temptation to overuse the manual 
override feature, particularly during the transitional 
period when KPIs are still not fully aligned across 
departments or wholly focused on overall customer 
experience. A telco’s broadband team could 
potentially advocate for sending out a campaign 
designed to boost broadband sales—regardless of 
its impact on long-term value. Telcos would be well 
advised to proceed with caution when exercising 
the manual override option, as its usage erodes the 
quality of the overall decisioning process.

The channel execution layer
The full breadth of telcos’ automated and human-
based channels drives the execution engine for 
personalization at scale. Inbound call centers, retail 
stores, websites, apps, SMS outreach, and email 
channels should ideally speak with one voice, so 
customers can switch channels seamlessly without 
being inundated with contradictory messaging. To 
ensure that telcos are sending the right message at 
the right time, on the most appropriate channel, all 

channels should be able to seamlessly integrate 
recommendations emanating from the decisioning 
layer and send back new, outcome-related data.

Very few telcos have achieved true omnichannel 
capabilities, in which all inbound, outbound, 
automated, and human-assisted channels are 
completely aligned. And no more than a handful 
have integrated commercial and service-related 
interactions across channels.

When this integration takes place, customers can 
schedule engineering visits through their preferred 
channels and track their technicians’ locations in 
real time, making visits much more convenient. 
Telcos can also gauge differences in how 
customers respond to interactions on various 
channels and at numerous times of day. When 
customers interact with the telco on any channel, 
the outcomes of these interactions are fed back 
into the decisioning layer to continually improve the 
model’s decisioning logic.

A major integrated European telco implemented a 
comprehensive channel strategy to overhaul its 
service and repairs experience, which had long 
been a source of customer dissatisfaction and a 
driver of churn. The telco digitized the experience, 
creating an app and web-based platform that allow 
customers to schedule engineering visits easily, 
monitor how far a technician is from their home, see 
how many customers are ahead of them, and 
communicate with engineers before and after visits.

This may seem simple, and from the customer’s 
perspective, it made the often frustrating process 
of fixing connectivity issues as easy as using a 
ridesharing or food-delivery app. Behind the 
scenes, though, the process involved a complex set 
of interactions among different systems. The effort 
was worth it, halving the telco’s inbound calls 
related to service ticket management and reducing 

Why AI-enabled customer service is key to scaling telco personalization

7

the number of unsuccessful visits (those failing to 
yield a satisfactory resolution by 20 percent). As 
important, the telco converted what we call “boo 
moments” into “wow moments,” redefining its 
customers’ expectations.

Enhancing the layers
To unlock the most value from the next-best-
experience engine, all four layers should be 
continually improved through a feedback loop that 
incorporates automated resolution tracking to 
ensure problems have been resolved. As new data 
becomes available, based on customers’ responses 
to recent campaigns or the relative success of 
communications on different channels, it should be 
incorporated as quickly as possible. This will ensure, 
for example, that customers who reject a particular 
offer do not receive the same one a week later. As 
machine learning models are continually retrained 
using the best, most recent data available, accuracy 
and effectiveness should improve.

Once the four layers are in place, along with 
processes for continually refining them, 
organizations can establish an entirely new set of 
end-to-end processes that use the engine’s 
insights to unlock value. This might involve creating 
hyperpersonalized marketing campaigns by 
combining inputs from the decisioning system with 
generative AI capabilities, or redesigning products 
and offerings based on analytical insights.

Starting the journey

True personalization at scale requires a 
fundamental shift—away from disconnected 
decision making based on business units’ individual 
KPIs and toward cohesive decision making based 
on what’s best for the customer at a given point in 
time. Succeeding with that scale of transformation 
requires critical enablers to be in place, at both 
infrastructural and organizational levels.

At the infrastructural level, telcos should strongly 
consider having a modern tech stack in place, one 
fortified with best-in-class computational power, 
data engineering and software development tools, 
machine learning operations, DevOps (software 
development and IT operations), and real-time 
delivery capabilities. Also, as mentioned earlier, 
data governance and accountability, spanning all 
four layers, are essential; a single team or leader 
has to serve as the point of contact for all data-
related questions and issues.

At an organizational level, people across dozens of 
commercial and service teams will need to work 
together on this effort, requiring complex workflows 
that stretch across the entire organization and new 
levels of collaboration among colleagues with 
diverse profiles, backgrounds, and experiences. 
Traditional “waterfall” ways of working won’t be 
sufficient for the rapid pace of this kind of work; 
developing and managing models based on real-
time data requires agile teams that can embrace a 
“fail fast” mentality and are empowered to make 
decentralized decisions. Finally, telcos will need to 
seek out and develop a new class of technical 
talent: workers skilled in scaling up machine 
learning–powered use cases, integrating technical 
and commercial considerations into decision 
making, and establishing effective pilots with solid 
feedback loops.

Organizations might start the journey with a 
diagnostic assessment to evaluate the maturity of 
their enablers and identify gaps that need to be 
filled immediately. The diagnostic can also help 
leaders align on the most appropriate deployment 
model. If certain enablers are particularly weak, 
starting with less complex models (using rule-based 
logic, for example) is preferable to waiting to 
develop the talent or tech stack required to build 
best-in-class models (which use neural networks).

Why AI-enabled customer service is key to scaling telco personalization

8

To determine which use cases to focus on first, 
telcos might embark on a scoping exercise to 
evaluate each use case based on the difficulty of 
implementation and its potential to generate value 
for the business. Telcos can begin with a set of 
lighthouse use cases that are relatively easy to 
build and demonstrate the value of a robust, 
integrated next-best-experience engine. 
Lighthouse use cases are an effective way to 
persuade business leaders that creating new ways 
of working, measuring success, and allocating 
investment dollars will be worth the effort.

Looking ahead

Over the next five years, customers will likely 
expect personalization at scale in all interactions 
with their telcos—including service, a critical aspect 
of any customer’s experience. During that same 
period, the scope of those interactions could 
expand greatly.

As 5G (fifth generation) technology matures, telcos 
have an opportunity to maximize their share of a 
value pool that could easily exceed $100 billion 
over the next five years by venturing further beyond 
core connectivity. In the coming years, we are likely 
to see telcos create a range of new revenue 

streams, from credit risk assessment products 
geared toward financial institutions to ecosystem 
offerings that bundle media and entertainment 
services. Personalization at scale, with a baked-in 
service component, has the potential to accelerate 
telcos’ efforts to capture value in new ways.

Telcos can also derive new value from their new 
data and analytics capabilities to streamline the 
scale-up of use cases and move into adjacent 
businesses such as home security or financial 
services. They can even spin off separate 
companies or business units that sell these 
capabilities as services to telcos and other 
customer-facing businesses, tapping into new 
value pools.

The foundation of all this potential change is the 
next-best-experience engine that integrates 
commercial and service-related capabilities. Telcos 
that act early to create this powerful tool may have 
a distinct advantage, with the extended runway 
needed to experiment, iterate, refine, and monetize 
their efforts. In the process, they’ll help establish 
the elevated customer expectations that all telcos 
will eventually have to satisfy—including those that 
may regret their decision not to act sooner.

Lars Engel Nielsen is a partner in McKinsey’s Copenhagen office, Lars Fiedler is a partner in the Hamburg office, Dominika 
Kampa and Stanislav Kucherenko are associate partners in the London office, Julian Raabe is a partner in the Munich office, 
Tim Schenk is an associate partner in the Melbourne office, and Davide Schiavotto is a senior partner in the Milan office.

The authors wish to thank Anshul Goyal, Kalina Janevska, and Sokto Sultimov for their contributions to this article.

Copyright © 2023 McKinsey & Company. All rights reserved.

Why AI-enabled customer service is key to scaling telco personalization

9

