Technology, Media & Telecommunications Practice

Responsible AI:  
A business imperative  
for telcos

Telcos that use responsible AI frameworks can unlock new revenue  
streams and spur long-awaited growth.

This article is a collaborative effort by Andrea Travasoni, Benjamim Vieira, Ferry Grijpink, and  
Roger Roberts, with Cécile Prinsen and Víctor Trigo, representing views from McKinsey’s Technology,  
Media & Telecommunications Practice.

October 2024

Over the past decade, the telecom industry has 
faced one daunting challenge after another. Telcos 
have endured relentless competitive pressure from 
fast-moving technology companies that entered 
their core sectors of communications, connectivity, 
and data transport. In the hopes of igniting revenue 
growth, telcos have sought to reinvent themselves. 
They have created new tech-driven product 
offerings—from the Internet of Things (IoT) and 
software as a service (SaaS) to over-the-top (OTT) 
video streaming. They have also ventured into 
adjacent industries such as insurance, financial 
services, and healthcare to offer new B2C and B2B 
services. Some of those initiatives have been 
moderately successful. But the truth is that telcos 
still struggle to compete with nimbler and more 
highly capitalized tech companies.

AI gives telcos another chance to reinvent themselves. 
The goal is to become AI-native organizations that 
embed AI into every aspect of the business to help 
drive growth and renewal. If telcos act quickly, they 
can lead the way in deploying both generative AI 
(gen AI) to improve the customer experience and  
cut costs and analytical AI to optimize their back- 
end operations and infrastructure. Many telcos have 
already begun to implement gen AI, deriving 
significant cost savings in areas such as marketing, 
sales, and customer service. McKinsey research 
shows that gen AI could drive significant EBITDA 
gains for telcos, with returns on incremental margins 
increasing three to four percentage points in  
two years, and as much as eight to ten percentage 
points in five years.1

However, telcos cannot transform themselves  
into AI-native companies without also focusing  
acutely on responsible AI (RAI), which is the practice 
of deploying AI in ways that are ethical, safe, 
transparent, and compliant with regulations. In the 
highly regulated telecom industry, RAI frameworks 
that govern accountability and transparency  
are critical to gaining consumer trust, protecting 
sensitive data, and safeguarding against security 
threats. All this makes RAI more than just an ethical 
exercise for telcos. It is also a business imperative.

To showcase the importance of RAI, we conducted 
an analysis of 100 critical AI use cases that telcos 
could develop. For each use case, we indicated the 
optimal level of RAI maturity, considering the 
inherent risks. For example, an advanced level of 
RAI would reinforce a use case that manages 
customers’ personal information. Our analysis 
indicates that telcos implementing the most 
advanced RAI practices could deploy use cases 
that collectively capture up to $250 billion in  
value worldwide by 2040, 44 percent of the full 
industry-wide value created by AI during that  
period (exhibit).2

How exactly can RAI create value? For starters,  
just like all AI deployments, RAI can significantly 
improve business processes and streamline 
technology integrations to reduce costs. Effective 
RAI can also strengthen brand reputation, with 
higher customer acquisition and retention often 
propelling revenue growth. In addition, RAI can help 
reduce commercial and reputational risks across  
an organization’s full suite of AI tools and 
applications, ensuring that they perform at the 
highest levels of accuracy. For example, RAI 
practices could help ensure a company’s customer 
service chatbot doesn’t use biased, incorrect,  
or sensitive language and that it never recommends 
a competitor’s product or service.

In this article, we outline how telcos can design and 
implement an RAI framework that could generate 
significant bottom-line impact. A strong RAI 
framework includes maturity models that telcos  
can use to assess their current strengths and 
weaknesses, as well as best practices to move 
through foundational, evolving, emerging, and 
advanced stages of RAI implementation. As they 
deploy such a framework, telcos will clarify their 
individual RAI road maps, including how to structure 
and implement governance, technology, and 
operating models. RAI frameworks can ensure that 
a telco’s AI deployments remain aligned with 
revenue and business goals.

1  “How generative AI could revitalize profitability for telcos,” McKinsey, February 21, 2024.
2 Ibid.

2

Responsible AI: A business imperative for telcosWeb <2024>
<ResponsibleAI>
Exhibit
Exhibit <1> of <1>

By 2040, telcos that use advanced responsible AI practices could capture 
up to $250 billion in value worldwide.

Estimated value of AI potential for telco industry by 2040, by maturity level,¹ $ billion

565
(100%)

250
(44%)

90
(16%)

75
(13%)

150
(27%)

Advanced
Responsible AI is deeply embedded into company 
culture, with proactive management

Performing
Responsible AI principles are integrated
with robust processes and governance

Evolving
Structured processes are present with early 
integration of responsible AI

Foundational
Initial awareness for responsible AI is established, 
with four primary components in place

¹Figures are midpoint of the estimated range of impact. References to AI include analytical AI (advanced analytics, deep learning, traditional machine learning) 
and generative AI. Estimated value from “The economic potential of generative AI: the next productivity frontier,” McKinsey, June 14, 2023.

McKinsey & Company

Industry-standard RAI frameworks 
are rare

Telcos can benefit from RAI in multiple ways:  
better business outcomes, competitive advantage, 
sustainable growth, increased customer trust, 
enhanced operational efficiency, stronger talent 
attraction, and, of course, financial gains. Forward-
thinking telcos recognize that robust RAI governance 
serves as a set of “good brakes” that enable them  
to “drive faster” to harness the full potential of AI 
while mitigating risks.

Based on our interviews with senior leaders at 
telcos worldwide, few are currently at the advanced 
stage of RAI deployment, with a majority still at the 
foundational or evolving stages. One of the biggest 
roadblocks to telcos deploying RAI is the lack of 
industry standards. Telcos want to deploy RAI, but 

there is no single agreed-upon framework to aid 
them in their journeys. Thus, instead of proactively 
adopting RAI, telcos are reactionary, adding 
piecemeal governance standards as new regulatory 
requirements emerge. This approach helps telcos 
avoid legal and financial repercussions but does not 
result in the type of cohesive and strategic RAI 
deployments necessary to fuel innovation.

Many governments have proposed or passed 
legislation to ensure that AI deployments are fair, 
transparent, accountable, and secure (Table 1). 
International organizations have proposed global 
policies for RAI, but none of these policies have 
been adopted on a wide scale (Table 2). And none of 
these regulations or policies are specific to the 
telecom industry.

3

Responsible AI: A business imperative for telcosCanada

Japan

China

Australia

Source: Fairly AI

Table 2

Initiatives

OECD

Table 1

Major governments around the world have enacted or proposed legislation  
to help regulate the safe and transparent use of AI.

Updated Sept 2024, nonexhaustive

Country/Region Name

Description

United States  
of America

Executive Order on the Safe, Secure, 
and Trustworthy Development and Use 
of Artificial Intelligence (in effect)

Drives safe, secure, and trustworthy development of AI through guiding 
principles and a unified approach to governance, with a focus on 
protecting American citizens and advancing American leadership abroad

European  
Union

EU Artificial Intelligence Act  
(in effect)

Artificial Intelligence and Data  
Act (proposed)

Addresses ethical questions and implementation challenges in various 
sectors (eg, education, energy, finance, and healthcare), with a focus on 
data quality, transparency, human oversight, and accountability

Would help ensure that AI systems deployed in Canada are safe and 
nondiscriminatory and would hold businesses accountable for how they 
develop and use these technologies

Act on the Protection of Personal 
Information (in effect)

Establishes rules and regulations regarding the collection, use, and 
handling of personal information by businesses and government 
agencies

Measures for the Management of 
Generative Artificial Intelligence 
Services (proposed)

Would make companies that provide generative AI (gen AI) services to 
the public responsible for their outputs and would require the data that is 
used to train their algorithms meet strict requirements

Australian Framework for Generative 
Artificial Intelligence  
in Schools (in effect)

Guides the responsible and ethical use of gen AI tools in ways that 
benefit students, schools, and society; led by the Australian Human 
Rights Commission

International organizations have proposed global policies for responsible AI,  
though none have been adopted on a wide scale.

Description

Outcomes

Recommendation of the 
Council on Artificial 
Intelligence (OECD, 2019)

First set of intergovernmental 
policy guidelines on AI

GPAI

Global Partnership on 
Artificial Intelligence  
(GPAI, 2020)

A multistakeholder initiative 
designed to bridge the gap 
between theory and practice in AI

UNESCO Recommendation on  
the Ethics of Artificial 
Intelligence (UNESCO, 
2021)

Draft agreement defining common 
values and principles to help ensure 
the healthy development of AI

Adopted by 42 countries, supported by EU

Influential in international policy setting, though not 
legally binding

Supports cutting-edge research and applied activities 
focusing on AI-related priorities

Publishes various reports and recommendations on 
responsible AI

Adopted by all 193 UNESCO member states

WHO

Ethics and governance of 
artificial intelligence for 
health (WHO, 2021)

Identifies ethical challenges and 
risks associated with the use of AI 
in healthcare

Includes six consensus principles to help ensure that AI 
benefits the public across all countries

Provides a set of governance recommendations

Source: Organizations’ websites; press search

4

Responsible AI: A business imperative for telcosWhile telecom industry associations are making 
progress on defining RAI standards, there are still 
barriers to achieving near-term success:

 — Limited leadership from central organizations. 
Telecom industry associations and standard-
setting bodies can show more leadership  
in advancing RAI practices. While some 
organizations actively promote RAI, few have 
developed comprehensive frameworks or 
provided clear guidance to their members.  
This gap hinders telcos from adopting  
best practices and achieving consistent 
standards of AI responsibility.

 — Limited availability of RAI industry benchmarks. 
The absence of RAI benchmarks in the telecom 
industry creates a significant challenge for 
telcos. Benchmarks serve as reference points 
that allow companies to evaluate their 
performance relative to industry standards  
and identify areas for improvement. Without 
these benchmarks, telcos lack metrics to  
gauge their progress in implementing RAI.  
This gap complicates efforts to foster 
transparency, as key stakeholders—including 
regulators, consumers, and partners— 
have no clear standards against which to 
measure a telco’s AI initiatives.

RAI frameworks for telcos have four 
characteristics

Despite a lack of clear standards for their industry, 
telcos have a strong desire to implement RAI. In our 
interviews , the majority of leaders expressed 
interest in creating and deploying RAI frameworks 
tailored not just to the telecom industry but to their 
individual businesses. Most hoped to begin their 
RAI journey with maturity models that assess where 
they stand and define the specific steps needed to 
become advanced users of RAI. Telcos see maturity 
models as a level-setting exercise to inform their 
strategic plans. They want to deploy easy-to-use 
modeling tools to score their levels of RAI readiness 
and translate these findings into executive-level 
summaries with calls to action. Unfortunately, few of 
the leaders we interviewed said they currently use 

RAI maturity models, mostly because of the tools’ 
limited availability. Telecom industry groups are 
working to define RAI maturity models specific to 
telcos, but it is still early days. For example, the 
Global System for Mobile Communications 
Association (GSMA) only recently created a tool for 
telcos to measure their RAI maturity.

What specific characteristics should an RAI 
framework for telcos include? Based on  
our interviews, a strong RAI framework for the 
telecom industry might encompass four  
key characteristics:

1. 

Industry-specific maturity models. These tools 
help telcos assess their RAI readiness and 
define specific benchmarks for each level. The 
models consider telcos’ unique goals and 
challenges with AI in light of a highly competitive 
market, interconnected networks, and extensive 
exposure to consumer data.

2.  Clear RAI guidelines. These building blocks 

offer a comprehensive overview of the various 
elements that comprise an RAI strategy, 
including governance, risk management, data 
quality, and ethical guidelines.

3.  Best practices. These practical strategies show 
telcos how to implement RAI effectively, including 
proven practices that advanced telcos have 
already successfully adopted and measured.

4.  Progress metrics. These measurement 

guidelines outline practical steps telcos can 
follow to improve their RAI capabilities  
and progress through each stage of maturity: 
foundational, evolving, performing,  
and advanced.

Industry-specific maturity models for 
assessment and goal setting
An effective RAI framework should include an  
easy-to-use maturity-modeling tool to help telcos 
fully understand their baseline AI readiness and 
identify opportunities for growth and improvement. 
Maturity models help telcos capture their full AI 
potential at every stage of deployment.

5

Responsible AI: A business imperative for telcosOperators just starting on their RAI journey can  
use maturity models to establish and measure 
essential foundational requirements. These include 
adopting core RAI principles, defining key roles  
and responsibilities, and setting up initial governance 
structures. Foundational requirements also include 
establishing a code of ethics for AI, appointing  
a chief AI officer, and creating an AI governance 
board. Companies in this foundational stage  
of RAI adoption are mostly looking to enhance 
specific aspects of their operations, such as 
improving operational efficiency or automating 
routine tasks like customer service.

On the other end of the spectrum are companies  
in the advanced stage of RAI deployment. These 
telcos use AI to create high-impact, customer-
facing use cases and integrate AI deeply into their 
strategic decision-making processes. Examples 
include using AI to create personalized customer 
experiences, to analyze vast amounts of data for 
strategic insights, or to spur innovation in product 
development. Thus, maturity models should 
integrate benchmarks and best practices for 
advanced users, including sophisticated risk 
management frameworks, comprehensive 
governance models, and continuous monitoring  
and improvement processes. For companies  
at the advanced stage, maturity models may also 
include AI auditing processes to ensure 
transparency and accountability.

Clear RAI guidelines to define overall strategy
An effective RAI framework outlines every step  
of a telco’s AI strategy and long-term road map.  
It includes definitions for governance, risk 
management, data quality, and ethics, with strategic 
and operational best practices to advance these 
policies at each stage of RAI maturity. The following 
are the essential components of an RAI framework.

Strategy. This defines the vision and principles for 
RAI governance in alignment with the organization’s 
values and strategic goals. Here is what a robust 
strategy should include:

 — Vision. A clear articulation of what RAI means  
for the organization and how it aligns with  
the company’s broader mission

 — Principles. Foundational ethical guidelines  
that steer AI development and deployment, 
ensuring fairness, transparency, accountability, 
and inclusivity

 — Alignment. Guidelines to ensure that the RAI 
strategy is consistent with the organization’s 
strategic objectives

 — Regulations. Rules to ensure adherence  

to local and international standards to mitigate 
compliance risks

Enablers. These activate well-defined best 
practices that are integral to a comprehensive RAI 
road map. Key features include the following:

 — Tools. An inventory of the responsible AI tools 
the organization will use for model validation, 
bias detection, and interpretability to ensure 
ethical AI development

 — Training. A plan for continuous education and 
training to help employees understand AI’s 
ethical implications and technical aspects

 — Change management. A structured approach 

the organization will use to transition individuals, 
teams, and organizations toward RAI practices

 — Communication. Clear, cascading communication 

channels to ensure that everyone in the 
organization is aligned with the RAI strategy  
and principles

Operating model. This helps ensure that the right 
talent, governance structures, team composition, 
and processes are in place to allow companies to 
implement RAI across all business activities. Critical 
elements include the following:

6

Responsible AI: A business imperative for telcos — Talent. The recruitment and development of 
professionals with the necessary skills in AI, 
ethics, and governance

 — Governance. Robust governance structures that 

define roles, responsibilities, and decision-
making processes related to RAI

 — Team structure. Formation of cross-functional 
teams that include data scientists, ethicists, 
legal experts, and business leaders

 — Processes. Implementation of standardized  

RAI development, deployment, and  
monitoring procedures to ensure consistency 
and accountability

 — Culture. The creation of a culture of ethical 
awareness and responsibility regarding AI, 
which encourages employees to speak up about 
potential issues

Risk. This emphasizes the importance of proactively 
monitoring and mitigating risks associated with AI 
and involves the following:

 — Measurement. Development of metrics and 

KPIs to evaluate the performance and risks of  
AI systems

 — Monitoring. Continuous observation of AI 

models for signs of bias, errors, or other issues 
through techniques such as risk management 
and third-party solution auditing

 — Reviews. Implementation of rigorous review-

and-challenge processes such as “red teaming” 
(simulating attacks to identify vulnerabilities) 
and “war gaming” (stress testing models under 
hypothetical scenarios)

 — Reporting. Regular documentation and 

communication to stakeholders to ensure 
transparency and to facilitate informed AI 
decision making

Best practices to deploy RAI in the 
telecom sector

An RAI framework for the telecom industry should 
provide specific best practices for each of the four 
key components described above. These best 
practices can help telcos apply general principles of 
RAI in a manner that acknowledges the industry’s 
unique challenges and opportunities, such as using 
AI for network optimization or customer churn 
prediction. A comprehensive RAI framework provides 
best practices for each maturity level—foundational, 
evolving, performing, and advanced—creating a 
road map that helps telcos advance from one level 
to the next.

What follows are sample best practices telcos  
could adopt at the foundational level of RAI 
deployment, though a full framework would provide 
a greater number of best practices and  
tailor them more specifically to an individual  
telco’s situation:

 — Strategy:

•  Vision. Write a high-level statement 

articulating the organization’s commitment to 
RAI that is aligned with the broader mission 
and serves as a guiding light for all AI 
activities.

•  Principles. Define early ethical principles  

that provide a clear framework for  
RAI, touching on fairness, transparency, 
accountability, and inclusivity.

•  Alignment. Develop a road map to incorporate 
AI principles into the organization’s overall 
business goals.

•  Regulations. Conduct initial research to 

understand the regulatory requirements at 
both the national and international levels.

7

Responsible AI: A business imperative for telcos — Enablers:

•  Tools. Find and adopt a first set of RAI tools  
to help with model validation, bias detection, 
and interpretability.

•  Culture. Create an initial internal 

communications campaign to introduce  
the concept of RAI.

 — Risk:

•  Training. Conduct an initial training program to 

•  Measurement. Develop basic metrics  

educate employees about AI’s ethical 
implications to build awareness of RAI 
practices across the organization.

and KPIs to evaluate the performance of  
early RAI systems and set up initial 
measurement frameworks.

•  Change management. Start basic processes 
to help the organization adapt to RAI, such  
as creating a simple road map to describe the 
transition process.

•  Communication. Choose channels—for 

example, a newsletter, blog, website, or social 
media platform—to disseminate information 
to employees and external stakeholders about 
the company’s RAI principles.

 — Operating model:

•  Monitoring. Establish basic processes to 

continually observe AI models to detect signs 
of bias, errors, or other issues.

•  Review. Create initial review-and-challenge 
processes, including plans for red teaming 
and war gaming.

•  Reporting. Set up reporting mechanisms to 
document and communicate RAI findings, 
including basic reports to keep stakeholders 
informed about the state of AI initiatives.

•  Talent. Create a plan to obtain the  

necessary talent to deploy RAI, including 
required new hires and plans for upskilling 
existing employees.

•  Governance. Set up an initial governance 

structure that defines roles and 
responsibilities for key stakeholders and 
outlines basic procedures.

•  Team structure. Take a high-level inventory of 
existing employees—including data scientists, 
developers, IT staff, legal experts, product 
managers, and business leaders—who could 
potentially join a cross-functional team to 
support RAI initiatives.

•  Processes. Research standardized 

procedures for AI development, deployment, 
and monitoring, and introduce an initial set of 
unified procedures.

Progress metrics to evolve from  
a foundational to an advanced 
maturity level

An effective RAI framework should offer a 
structured pathway for telcos to improve their RAI 
maturity over time. At each maturity level, the 
framework should include specific progress metrics 
a telco needs to meet to advance to the next level.

For example, at the foundational level, one  
progress metric might be: “Share the company’s 
RAI vision with all employees through an  
internal communications campaign and test their 
knowledge of the program through a feedback 
mechanism.” At the evolving method, a metric might 
be: “Finish a multipart risk training program for  
the RAI cross-functional team.” And at the 
performing level, a metric might be: “Develop and 
launch an RAI innovation lab to foster continuous 
improvement and experimentation.”

8

Responsible AI: A business imperative for telcosEach telco will have different goals for RAI 
deployment, so their progress metrics will differ 
based on the unique objectives defined in their 
initial road maps.

Telcos with structured RAI practices are not just 
leaders from an ethical standpoint; they also stand 
to generate billions of dollars in additional value. 
Investing in RAI may position today’s beleaguered 

telcos for a competitive edge in the next decade, 
providing a new avenue for them to compete 
alongside technology companies. By prioritizing 
RAI, telecom operators can capture the full 
potential of AI for their businesses and build trust 
with customers, leading to new innovations  
and new revenues. Emphasizing RAI can also  
help telecom companies attract and retain  
the best talent, fostering a culture of continuous 
improvement. Put simply, implementing AI 
responsibly makes good business sense.

Andrea Travasoni is a senior partner in McKinsey’s Milan office; Benjamim Vieira is a senior partner in the Madrid office, 
where Víctor Trigo is an associate partner; Ferry Grijpink is a partner in the Amsterdam office; Roger Roberts is a partner in 
the Bay Area office; and Cécile Prinsen is an associate partner in the London office.

This article was edited by Kristi Essick, an executive editor in the Bay Area office.

Designed by McKinsey Global Publishing 
Copyright © 2024 McKinsey & Company. All rights reserved.

9

Scan • Download • PersonalizeFind more content like this on the McKinsey Insights AppResponsible AI: A business imperative for telcos