Technology, Media & Telecommunications Practice

Scaling the AI-native telco 

With telcos aiming to integrate AI throughout their organizations, here’s 
how they can unlock the full potential while positioning themselves for the 
next wave of innovation.

This article is a collaborative effort by Benjamim Vieira, Guilherme Cruz, Ignacio Ferrero, Joshan Cherian 
Abraham, and Tomas Lajous, with Borja Belda and Eric Parsonnet, representing views from McKinsey’s 
Technology, Media & Telecommunications Practice.

February 2025

© Getty Images

Two years ago, with the introduction of 
ChatGPT sparking a surge of optimism about the 
transformative power of artificial intelligence in 
business, we heralded the rise of the “AI-native” 
telco. These would be organizations where “AI 
is viewed as a core competency that powers 
decision making across all departments and 
organization layers,” where “top executives 
serve as champions of critical AI initiatives,” and 
where “data and AI capabilities are managed 
as products, built for scalability and reusability.” 
The opportunity, we argued, was threefold: AI for 
core operations, AI as a service, and AI for the 
consumer. And the prize for getting it right  
was huge.

with a slew of new questions: How can companies 
prepare themselves to capitalize on the next 
frontier of innovation, particularly regarding 
agentic AI, a new innovation that promises more 
seamless workflow redesign and scalability? 
What is the best way to scale the technology 
to generate organization-wide value? How 
can enterprises best integrate “traditional” AI 
and machine-learning tools with newer gen 
AI capabilities? And how can operators drive 
adoption and change behaviors? (Related 
questions about how telcos can capture a bigger 
role in the AI value chain and create new services 
and business models are addressed in a separate 
article.)

When we published that analysis, only a few telco 
operators had fully embraced AI as a priority 
and adopted an AI-focused mindset designed to 
scale the technology. Two years later, by contrast, 
nearly all telco operators are investing in and 
capturing benefits from the technology—and a 
few are moving toward doing it at scale. Our most 
recent survey of C-level executives at telcos finds 
that about 50 percent are “currently capturing 
impact from AI/gen AI,” compared with some 
25 percent in our last survey a year ago. Some 
early adopters already are reporting significant 
results, using AI to drive significant cost 
reductions in select functions and leveraging the 
technology as a catalyst for growth and customer 
experience improvements through features like 
hyper-personalization. For example, one North 
American telco used AI to harness granular 
insights on customer experiences on its network—
insights that helped it optimize network capital by 
about 10 percent. A leading European telco used 
gen AI to accelerate its hyper-personalization 
efforts for upselling, achieving a 5 to 15 percent 
increase in average revenue per user (ARPU), 
depending on customer segment. Yet another 
telco deployed an AI-driven help desk bot that led 
to a 35 percent reduction in cost per call and a 60 
percent higher customer resolution rate.

These results make it clear that the question of 
whether AI will create value has been replaced 

Most telcos already are grappling with these 
questions: 64 percent of respondents to our 
recent C-suite survey say they are focused on 
scaling AI and that they are working to capture 
impact across the enterprise, aiming for a 10 to 15 
percent improvement in EBITDA (Exhibit 1). This 
will not be easy. But moving slowly or clinging to 
a wait-and-see attitude is simply not an option. 
As the recent furor surrounding DeepSeek 
shows, the pace of innovation is accelerating 
rapidly, which is forcing business leaders to 
move faster as well. At the same time, rapid 
innovation requires organizations to be smarter, 
ensuring they build the proper data architectures, 
risk management guardrails, and change 
management practices. 

Fortunately, we’ve learned a lot over the past two 
years. In this article, we outline the opportunity 
from the next frontier, highlighting the key 
questions organizations must address and 
sharing our learnings to date. Think of it as a 
playbook to help telcos get the most out of AI  
in 2025. 

What is AI’s next frontier, and how 
do we prepare for it? 
Some 61 percent of C-level executives say they 
consider AI to be a “blockbuster technology 
that will transform the industry.” One of the key 

2

Scaling the AI-native telco

Exhibit 1 
Anticipating major cost savings, telco operators are shifting their focus to 
Anticipating major cost savings, telco operators are shifting their focus to 
scaling their AI/gen AI efforts.
scaling their AI/gen AI efforts.

Primary focus

Estimated impact on cost savings, by function, most common response

2025

50+

2023¹

Cost savings, %

2023

0

1–5

6–20

21–50

Marketing and sales

Network

IT

Customer servicing

Support functions

2025²

34%

focused on
pilots and
quick wins

64%

focused on
scaling AI/
gen AI

1GenAI CxO Survey 2023 (n = 130).
2GenAI CxO Survey 2025 (n = 52).

McKinsey & Company

drivers of that transformation is the introduction 
of AI agents (or agentic AI), a technology with the 
potential to supercharge the already considerable 
promises of gen AI (Exhibit 2). 

While agents remain nascent, telcos already are 
exploring and deploying the technology, spurred 
in part by releases from leading tech players (for 
example, Salesforce’s Agentforce). Nearly 42 
percent of executives identify scaling agentic use 
cases across functions as a priority for 2025—
notably in customer service, where about 75 
percent of executives aim to use the technology. 
The fundamentals for scaling and realizing impact 
from AI agents remain largely the same as scaling 
more “traditional” AI, as discussed later in this 
article. In particular, the design of agents will 
need to be driven by close collaboration between 
subject-matter experts and gen AI practitioners to 

clearly define the business problems, reasoning, 
and tasks that can be offloaded to AI agents. 

While agentic AI will support the automation of 
existing workflows that are driven by humans, 
such as the creation of a summary after a 
customer interaction, the technology also can be 
the basis for new workflows and processes, which 
could include an AI agent capable of reading prior 
call transcripts, identifying potential opportunities 
to upsell, and automatically alerting an outbound 
call center team. Combined with more traditional 
tools like robotic process automation (RPA), AI 
agents could unlock a significantly higher level of 
automation within telcos. In our survey, 52 percent 
of executives say they are using or planning to use 
AI agents to improve existing workflow automation 
efforts in areas including energy optimization, 
financial planning, and software development.  

Scaling the AI-native telco

3

Exhibit 2 
Gen AI agents are software entities that simulate human behavior.
Gen AI agents are software entities that simulate human behavior.

Gen AI agent capabilities

Perceive external
environment

Gather information through text, image, video, and audio sources, as well as input
from upstream/downstream systems

Make decisions,
plan, and execute

Create and implement action plan based on human inputs, breaking the plan into
smaller tasks until each is executed 

Use tools

Autonomously utilize tools¹ (eg, RAG,² APIs, web browsing, machine learning models,
code execution) to process data and integrate with existing systems

Learn and
improve

Create feedback loop to iterate outputs then codify recipes

Agents differ from co-pilots by executing tasks with minimal human input.
In contrast, humans collaborate with a co-pilot throughout the task.

1For example, through function-calling, a mechanism that enables agents to connect with external tools and systems. It involves generating an output string that 
invokes a JSON structure, allowing for explicit calls to tools with fixed parameter.
2Retrieval augmented generation.

McKinsey & Company

AI agents for telcos will likely take on a variety  
of forms:

to customers based on data usage patterns and 
revenue goals.

 — Simple reflex agents could take action based on 

preset rules similar to current next-best-action 
systems (for instance, sending a bill shock 
notification to users who are approaching their 
monthly data limits). 

 — Utility-based agents might be able to 

independently consider several options and act 
accordingly. An AI agent for email, for example, 
might choose whether to automatically reply to 
an unhappy customer or to draft an email for a 
service rep to send, depending on the tone and 
severity of the inbound email. 

 — Goal-based agents could make decisions 

to achieve specific goals. For example, a 
recommender agent might suggest upsell offers 

 — Hierarchical agents could break complex tasks 
into manageable subtasks, allowing for more 
organized control and decision making. An 
example could be an agent designed to create 
financial reports, which first breaks the task into 
research and content generation.

 — Multi-agent systems could be capable of 

combining multiple autonomous agents working 
independently and/or cooperatively to achieve 
a collective goal. The system could, for example, 
function as a centralized employee assistant 
capable of driving multiple network-related 
tasks, such as answering queries, providing 
recommendations, and auto-completing notes 
following a site visit.

4

Scaling the AI-native telco

For telcos that execute on the opportunity, this 
could be a game changer. Imagine, for instance, 
a fully realized AI-native telco in which agents 
augment humans or autonomously execute end-
to-end workflows. Here’s an example of what that 
might look like in B2B sales (Exhibit 3):

A sales rep turns to the agentic system with open-
ended request: “Help me find leads to pursue 
this week.” The system springs into action, with 
the following steps. First, a research AI agent 
identifies and prioritizes prospects (determining 
which, if any, can be handled without any rep 
intervention) and makes initial contact on behalf 
of the rep. Second, the agent creates bespoke 
product recommendations and pricing based on 
prospects’ profiles, autonomously validating with 
finance. Third, the agent schedules meetings and 
generates pitch materials for reps, autonomously 
negotiating lower-value deals. Fourth, the deal 
is finalized via automated sales ops, such as 
risk approvals, ordering, and shipping. And 
fifth, an agent autonomously finds and develops 
opportunities to further capitalize on the 
relationship. This kind of automation, heretofore 
only a fantasy, allows reps to focus on critical 

client conversations, leading to higher conversion 
rates, higher sales volumes, and lower overhead 
costs.

While the common focus with agentic systems 
tends to be on efficiency gains, AI agents 
offer much more potential. One telco company 
is developing an agentic system capable of 
handling requests related to its network—for 
example, immediately understanding root 
causes of network issues and proactively raising 
potential upcoming issues. This innovation is not 
just about reaching a solution faster; it’s about 
achieving a better solution where the AI agent 
acts as both a thought partner and a creator. 
Additionally, agents can augment transformation 
teams at telcos and support them in identifying 
opportunities for impact. They can help drive 
“one-off” complex and time-consuming analyses 
(for instance, the optimization of real estate costs 
at central offices across hundreds of locations.) 
Agents also can support the assessment and 
reimagining of business processes – by analyzing, 
say, documentation on workflows and interviews 
with subject-matter experts to recommend new, 
streamlined processes.

Exhibit 3 
AI agents could assist across various stages of the sales journey.
AI agents could assist across various stages of the sales journey.

AI agent capabilities by stage of sales journey

Achievable near-term

Achievable long-term

Lead identification
and qualification

Offer/pricing
creation

Meeting preparation

Sales operations

Relationship
management

Identify and prioritize 
leads (eg, via web 
search)

Create bespoke prod-
uct recommendations 
and pricing based on 
prospect profiles

Develop pitch
materials based on 
previous successful 
deals

Use internal tools to 
finalize deals (eg, 
account creation, 
device ordering,
shipping)

Continuously monitor 
relationship (eg, customer 
interactions, industry 
trends) to identify oppor-
tunities to grow account

Automatically contact 
and vet potential 
customers

Automatically engage 
internal teams for 
approval

Interact with client to 
schedule meetings 
and handle logistics

Autonomously engage 
customer at opportune 
time for up-sell/cross-sell

McKinsey & Company

Scaling the AI-native telco

5

Agents are not the only way AI is driving a new 
wave of creativity and innovation. Already, we 
are seeing telcos deploying AI not just to boost 
efficiency but also to develop new features 
for existing products and create entirely new 
offerings. A Latin American telco is adding 
a new gen-AI-enabled service for its B2B 
customers that offers hyper-personalized 
messaging capabilities on its B2B messaging 
platform to enable the management of SMS, 
email, and WhatsApp messaging; early results 
have shown a click-through rate of more than 
40 percent. Another operator is building a new 
gen AI software-as-a-service (SaaS) offering 
that enables the generation, submission, and 
distribution of electronic tax documents. Some 
telcos are exploring new ways to upgrade their 
mobile and home plan offerings by bundling 
credits for large language model (LLM) providers 
or providing exclusive access to premium AI 
capabilities through their partners.

Other telcos are doubling down on enabling the 
infrastructure to power AI, from connecting new 
data centers with high-capacity links to offering 
enterprises more intelligent networks (for example, 
with latency-based routing and high elasticity) 
and enabling distributed computing. One Asian 
operator is moving beyond the connectivity 
infrastructure and into AI as a service by providing 
B2B customers a proprietary AI platform to 
support machine-learning training and inferencing 
at the edge for AI workloads. 

With innovations such as these, leading-edge 
telcos stand to become a fundamental backbone 
of the AI economy. 

What does it mean to scale AI across 
the enterprise?
To capitalize on these kinds of future 
developments, telcos must successfully build 
the capabilities to scale AI throughout their 
organizations. We think of scaling as the ability 
to deploy multiple interconnected AI/gen AI 
use cases among thousands of employees or 

hundreds of thousands of customers in a cost-
effective manner.

For organizations that are large and complex, this 
is a difficult task that often proceeds in a series of 
fits and starts, advances and setbacks. One large 
organization, for example, deployed a use case for 
a gen-AI-based IT developer copilot, experiencing 
initial productivity gains of 25 percent to 40 
percent—only to see those gains quickly fall to 
less than 5 percent, with limited financial impact. 
Why the drop-off? It turned out that the early 
adopters in the pilot were more enthusiastic than 
the rank-and-file users when the program was 
rolled out throughout the organization. Managers 
also cited poor communication between tech 
developers and business teams, incomplete or 
inconsistent data foundations, and limited change 
management to drive adoption. Situations like this 
are hardly unusual; commonly reported inhibitors 
to scaling include the absence of a shared vision 
and operating model between development and 
business/user teams.

Based on our work supporting leading telcos 
around the globe and through conversations with 
C-level executives, we have synthesized seven 
key elements that organizations must get right to 
scale impact. Think of it as a “scaling framework” 
for success.  

1. Target domains and end-to-end persona 
workflows for transformational impact
While individual use cases can demonstrate 
potential and generate excitement, very rarely do 
they drive meaningful impact. A gen AI use case 
to automatically create personalized customer 
messages, for example, won’t do much to 
mitigate high levels of churn. But when a leading 
telco combined multiple related use cases—an 
AI-based audiencing tool, a unified churn model, 
a real-time proactive decisioning/NBX (next best 
action) tool, and an automated multivariate testing 
model—into a single solution, it transformed an 
entire end-to-end workflow. That operator now 
boasts the least churn in its country of operation. 

6

Scaling the AI-native telco

That organization succeeded because it took 
a domain view, reimagining a set of critical 
workflows and persona experiences and 
developing a set of use cases to work in 
conjunction to make it happen. In another 
example, an Americas-based telco expects 
to reap up to $100 million in productivity 
gains from a set of AI use cases to support 
all network operation personas across their 
most common tasks. Targeting core KPIs like 
overtime pay, customer experience, average 
handling time for ticket/dispatch, and upskilling 
time for new employees, the telco performed a 
granular mapping of each persona’s “day in the 
life” to ensure the tools’ required functionality 
and capabilities. Not only is this approach 
transforming workflows today, but the process 
also collected valuable data and learnings to 
inform the transition to autonomous networks in 
the future.

2. Build a scalable, modular AI platform
Many large telcos have seen a proliferation 
of AI teams, each running its own pilots and 
experiments. The result: Multiple teams are 
developing AI use cases in silos, without sharing 
technology or best practices with one another. At 
one telco, for instance, the customer care team 
was developing its own knowledge management 
use case, unaware the network operations 
team was pursuing a project leveraging a 
similar retrieval augmented generation (RAG) 
architecture. But while unleashing an array of 
unrelated use cases may be an effective way to 
drive creativity and drive enthusiasm for AI, it may 
not be the best way to scale the technology to 
generate meaningful value. 

Leading organizations instead are developing 
centralized AI platforms that can serve as 
repositories of proven and maintained AI/gen 
AI modules, APIs, tools, and code snippets 
that have been vetted and deemed safe for 
consumption and use across the organization. 
This platform approach helps drive quicker 
implementation of successful use cases while 
maintaining consistent guardrails and leveraging 
proven architectures and use-case “recipes” 

(Exhibit 4). What’s more, such a modular platform 
allows for easy plug-and-play usage, meaning 
you can be ready to leverage new innovations, 
such as cheaper models like DeepSeek, that may 
emerge. 

By building a gen AI platform of about 50 
reusable services, one North American telco 
successfully reduced the time it took to build 
new use cases from months to about two weeks 
while ensuring that all similar use cases used 
similar architectures and that all best practices/
learnings were shared to a common repository. 
Without this kind of centralized repository, 
by contrast, use cases are slow to generate 
business value as developers experiment on their 
own. The siloing of efforts also has the potential 
to introduce risk. 

Two key components of an effective AI platform 
are a machine-learning ops capability and an AI 
financial operations capability. The first ensures 
the organization can continually track and drive 
improvement for AI use cases deployed to 
production; the second ensures it can continually 
measure and optimize the total cost of running an 
AI solution. 

3. Implement adequate data foundations
Thirty percent of the executives we surveyed 
cite limitations in their data as a core inhibitor 
of impact at scale. Perhaps more important, 45 
percent say data is the core inhibitor they foresee 
for scaling AI agents. Scaling gen AI requires new 
discipline in consolidating and managing data. 
That’s because any AI/gen AI solution is only as 
good as the data it accesses. 

Especially with gen AI, the ability to manage 
unstructured and structured data together is 
critical, requiring operators to reconcile years 
and even decades of contracts, annotations, 
and technical blueprints that have previously 
been dispersed across the organization. This is 
especially critical in the context of B2B, wireline, 
and network settings, which contain legacy and 
complex business agreements and documents. 

Scaling the AI-native telco

7

Exhibit 4a 
One of the key breakthroughs of gen AI is its ability to rapidly analyze and draw 
A centralized gen AI platform can enable multiple use cases via a common 
insights from “unstructured” data, like contracts, transcripts, and surveys. 
set of reusable elements.

Multiple use cases of centralized gen AI platform, illustrative

Blueprints
Common set of gen AI “recipes”

Insight-extraction use cases¹
Targeted implementation to solve business problems

Insight
extraction

Knowledge
management
(chat)

Document
generation

…

• Call center transcripts
• Sales  contracts
• Real estate contracts
• Regulatory documents
• Customer sentiment

Components
Collection of approved, maintained, and interoperable code components

Data ingestion

OCR² readers

Unstructured data

Splitters chunking

Structured data

LLM-based parsers

Table parser

Data retrieval and storage

Reranking

Vector store adaptors

Object store adaptors

Processing and generation

Multi-stage retrieval

Embedding
generation

Sketch-to-image

Metadata-store
adaptors

Text to image
generation

Summary/
doc generation

Advanced functionality

Multi agents library

Tools (eg, web search)

Chat

Capability specific
prompts

Chat summarization

Local and cloud
LLM providers

Metadata filtering

RAG:³ regular
and multimodal

Prompt optimizer

Evaluation

Security and management

Authentication

Authentication

Guardrails

1Non-exhaustive.
2Optical character recognition.
3Retrieval augmented generation.

McKinsey & Company

8

Scaling the AI-native telco

Exhibit 4b 
A centralized gen AI platform can enable multiple use cases via a common 
Gen AI copilots draw on large volumes of data to provide real-time help to 
set of reusable elements.
users with sales, customer service, technical troubleshooting, and more. 

Multiple use cases of centralized gen AI platform, illustrative

Blueprints
Common set of gen AI “recipes”

Knowledge management (chat) use cases¹
Targeted implementation to solve business problems

Insight
extraction

Knowledge
management
(chat)

Document
generation

…

• Network tech co-pilot
• Sales rep co-pilot
• Customer care co-pilot
• HR chatbot
• Customer care chatbot

Components
Collection of approved, maintained, and interoperable code components

Data ingestion

OCR² readers

Unstructured data

Splitters chunking

Structured data

LLM-based parsers

Table parser

Data retrieval and storage

Reranking

Vector store adaptors

Object store adaptors

Processing and generation

Multi-stage retrieval

Embedding
generation

Sketch-to-image

Metadata-store
adaptors

Text to image
generation

Summary/
doc generation

Advanced functionality

Multi agents library

Tools (eg, web search)

Chat

Capability specific
prompts

Chat summarization

Local and cloud
LLM providers

Metadata filtering

RAG:³ regular
and multimodal

Prompt optimizer

Evaluation

Security and management

Authentication

Authentication

Guardrails

1Non-exhaustive.
2Optical character recognition.
3Retrieval augmented generation.

McKinsey & Company

Scaling the AI-native telco

9

Exhibit 4c 
A centralized gen AI platform can enable multiple use cases via a common 
Gen AI tools also can help users create new documents—RFPs, customer 
set of reusable elements.
emails, sales-pitch materials, and the like. 

Multiple use cases of centralized gen AI platform, illustrative

Blueprints
Common set of gen AI “recipes”

Document generation use cases¹
Targeted implementation to solve business problems

Insight
extraction

Knowledge
management
(chat)

Document
generation

…

• Request-for-proposal response
• Email authoring
• Sales account planning
• Sales pitch materials
• Hyper-personalized marketing

Components
Collection of approved, maintained, and interoperable code components

Data ingestion

OCR² readers

Unstructured data

Splitters chunking

Structured data

LLM-based parsers

Table parser

Data retrieval and storage

Reranking

Vector store adaptors

Object store adaptors

Processing and generation

Multi-stage retrieval

Embedding
generation

Sketch-to-image

Metadata-store
adaptors

Text to image
generation

Summary/
doc generation

Advanced functionality

Multi agents library

Tools (eg, web search)

Chat

Capability specific
prompts

Chat summarization

Local and cloud
LLM providers

Metadata filtering

RAG:³ regular
and multimodal

Prompt optimizer

Evaluation

Security and management

Authentication

Authentication

Guardrails

1Non-exhaustive.
2Optical character recognition.
3Retrieval augmented generation.

McKinsey & Company

At the same time, investing in the core foundations 
for data remains just as important. While some 
telcos were early movers in transforming their data 
capabilities and developing data products and 
digital twins of key domains like network and call 
center, most have only started to use the impetus 
of gen AI to transform their data infrastructures 
into more modern hybrid lakehouse architectures 
with structured data products that allow for 
curated and reusable data across use cases.

4. Drive adoption with best-in-class  
change management
Telcos are complex organizations with a large 
number of varied roles—especially frontline roles 
like call center reps, network technicians, and retail 
store employees. What’s more, telco employees 
tend to stay in their roles longer—an average of 7.5 
years, almost double the tenure in other industries, 
according to the US Department of Labor. An 
unintended consequence of these factors can 

10

Scaling the AI-native telco

be a high degree of organizational inertia when 
it comes to embracing new tools and ways of 
operating. In one case, a telco developed an 
AI-based field support tool to drive efficiency, only 
to see field techs refuse to use it. 

To scale AI, it is essential for telcos to develop and 
execute a comprehensive change management 
strategy to ensure widespread adoption of 
new technologies and processes across the 
organization. At the macro level, it should start 
at the top, with CEO-led communication on the 
importance of reimagining the organization 
through AI, coupled with targeted AI proficiency 
programs to highlight the benefits and allay 
the fears of change. At the micro level, change 
management plans should be built into the design 
of the AI use cases from the outset; adoption 
should be a critical part of the development 
life cycle, rather than being treated as an 
afterthought. Engagement plans should be built in 
close collaboration with frontline employees and 
managers who will be the ultimate users of the 
tools. With the field support tool in the previous 
paragraph, for example, managers were able to 
regroup and drive adoption by adding features 
for explainability, incentivizing more tenured 
technicians to use the tool, and encouraging 
managers to ask about tool usage in one-to-
one check-ins. In another example, an operator 
launched sprints, typically consisting of two to 
four weeks during which business and tech teams 
met nearly daily to hash out detailed AI use cases. 
Only through these sprints were they able to build 
solutions that were sufficiently backed by users to 
drive adoption.

5. Develop an AI operating model and  
talent strategy
One of the key inhibitors to scaling AI solutions 
is the complexity of the stakeholders involved, 
including, for example, development teams, CIO/
IT teams, product managers, end users, and 
business-unit leaders. About 85 percent of 
operators we surveyed say the primary decisions 
about AI strategy, use case development, and 
foundational infrastructure take place among 
different teams. Especially pervasive has been a 
disconnect between AI development teams and 

the business unit leaders, which has resulted 
in missed opportunities for business-backed 
features. Another disconnect occurs between AI 
development teams and CIO/IT teams, especially 
when it comes to embedding AI solutions into 
existing systems. 

Overcoming such disconnects requires 
organizations to implement a joint governance 
cadence between technology and business teams, 
to prioritize AI solutions and maintain alignment 
with business goals. This is not just about setting 
up a cross-functional gen AI center of excellence, 
which many telcos have done. Telcos must 
consider how to revamp their existing processes, 
such as decision making, budget allocation, and 
intake management, by setting up a governance 
model that brings together all stakeholders at 
different levels. Organizations also must invest in 
AI-focused skills, both by hiring new employees 
(especially data engineers, data scientists, and 
AI product managers) and by retraining existing 
talent across different parts of the organization.

6. Establish a strong AI partnership ecosystem
While many telco operators have relatively 
advanced IT organizations, it is difficult to keep 
up with the rapid pace of AI’s evolution. Yet 
most telcos tend to consider large software 
and tech players, including AI-focused players, 
to be “vendors” rather than “partners.” This is 
a missed opportunity. Telcos would be wise 
to take a page from the software industry and 
curate an ecosystem of trusted partners that 
can offer support with accelerating use cases. A 
hyperscaler partner, for example, could augment 
a telco’s own data science and developer 
teams, as well as help create telco-specific AI 
capabilities. Telco-specific data, for example, has 
not necessarily been included in the training sets 
of some popular foundation models, which could 
inhibit the next frontier of use cases. 

To ensure adequate control over partnerships, 
operators should avoid engaging in numerous 
low-impact collaborations and instead link with 
partners that can add distinctive value and 
align with the company’s unique assets. These 
ecosystems also can extend beyond technology 

Scaling the AI-native telco

11

partners to include service partners, research 
laboratories, educational institutions, and even 
other telcos in noncompeting regions.

have access to can be leveraged and monetized 
through AI—but only if customers, employees and 
regulators trust that the data is being used safely 
and responsibly.  

7. Manage risks and ensure regulatory adherence
While AI can have significant impact, it is critical to 
ensure that usage and deployment efforts account 
for ethical and regulatory factors. Telcos must 
seek to avoid biases in outputs—both customer 
and employee facing—by implementing robust 
guidelines in use cases like customer sentiment 
analysis, employee performance assessment, and 
hyper-personalization. While operators already face 
significant regulatory oversight regarding the use of 
proprietary data, telcos will need to establish clear 
information security guardrails and a responsible AI 
framework that builds trust in AI-driven services to 
ensure that all AI-generated output meets quality 
and safety standards and that there are robust 
data governance and privacy measures to protect 
consumer data. 

This cannot be an afterthought. In fact, responsible 
AI has the potential to unlock a huge source of 
differentiation. The rich data sets that telcos 

While the impact and value of AI are already 
evident, it’s important to remember that we are 
only at the beginning of the AI revolution. The 
potential extends beyond operational efficiency to 
re-accelerating growth and reimagining products, 
offerings, and business models. As technology 
evolves, operators must be prepared to evolve 
alongside it, with the structures and practices 
in place to meet the moment, whether they are 
pursuing incremental improvements, such as 
cheaper models and better performance, or 
outright reinvention and paradigm shifting, as with 
AI agents. It is critical for C-level executives to ask, 
“Am I set up to truly scale AI and capture the full 
value potential?” The rewards of doing so can be 
immense, and the competitive pain of not doing so 
stands to be equally large. 

Benjamim Vieira is a senior partner in McKinsey’s Lisbon office; Guilherme Cruz and Joshan Cherian Abraham are 
partners in the New York office, where Tomas Lajous is a senior partner, Borja Belda is an associate partner, and Eric 
Parsonnet is an consultant; and Ignacio Ferrero is a partner in the Miami office.

This article was edited by Larry Kanter, a senior editor in the New York office.

Copyright © 2025 McKinsey & Company. All rights reserved.

12

Scaling the AI-native telco

Scan • Download • PersonalizeFind more content like this on the McKinsey Insights App