Private Capital Practice

Unlocking value from 
technology and AI for 
institutional investors

Strategy, tools, and talent are key considerations for institutional 
investors as they adopt and scale technology to generate alpha.

This article is a collaborative effort by Bryan Petzold, Elizabeth Skovira, Frédéric Jacques, Marcos 
Tarnowski, Piyush Sharma, and Raj Bector, with Akshat Kumar, Jérémie Guay, and Ragi Ragavan, 
representing views from McKinsey Technology and McKinsey’s Financial Services and Private 
Capital Practices.

January 2025

It is difficult to talk about investment success without mentioning technology innovation, AI, 
and generative AI. The investment landscape has fundamentally shifted over the years—but 
where are the world’s largest investors on this journey?

Many institutional investors, be it pensions, insurers, or sovereign wealth funds around the 
world, are struggling with how, when, and where to begin their technology transformations 
(particularly in a budget-conscious context). As a result, they are not only falling perilously 
behind more forward-leaning investors with whom capital ultimately competes but also failing to 
capture the full financial benefits of such transformations.

Our analysis suggests that institutional investors’ effective deployment of technology and AI 
could generate an ROI of more than tenfold across three domains: investment returns, 
operational efficiency, and risk management.

A set of leading investors have figured out how to rewire their organizations with technological 
capabilities—and reap these rewards. We undertook detailed analysis to better understand what 
they are doing differently, and how the rest of the industry can adopt these best practices to 
accelerate their tech journey and gain a performance edge.

We found that leading investors start by setting long-term aspirations for their technology 
strategy in alignment with the investment philosophy. They develop a strong technology 
foundation using AI and cutting-edge investment platforms. Their operating model is built in a 
way that instills close collaboration between the technology team and other functions; it also 
ensures all major technology initiatives are done in an iterative manner to manage costs while 
delivering value. These institutions also allocate time and resources toward building and 
retaining technology talent as well as mitigating potential risks, such as regulatory compliance 
and cybersecurity. And, last but not least, they prioritize change management at every step to 
encourage widespread adoption of new technologies across the organization.

The role of technology in institutional investing

Institutional investors have a complex mandate of delivering superior risk-adjusted returns on 
their portfolios, even during uncertain times. Technology can help them deliver on this mandate 
in several critical areas:

—  New alpha-generation strategies. As private markets enter a slower era of growth, 

managers may need to unlock new ways to capture investment alpha (for example, investing 
in higher-returning early-stage opportunities). They can use AI tools to parse through large 
data sets and identify hidden market signals.

Unlocking value from technology and AI for institutional investors

2

— Dynamic portfolio construction. Technology can help investors dynamically adjust their 
portfolios in response to market shifts by establishing a total portfolio view, increasing 
visibility into the fund’s exposure to risk factors and performance drivers such as 
environmental, social, and governance (ESG); reallocating investments rapidly; and 
managing liquidity.

— Streamlined investment operations. Investors can achieve cost efficiency by reimagining 
investment operations through technology. For example, an operations team can use 
exception-based processing to improve delivery speed and risk management, and automate 
manual, repeatable tasks so that it can focus on more complex tasks, such as the processing 
of investment vehicles.

— Enabling disintermediated models. For institutional investors moving toward 

disintermediated models such as co-invest, co-syndicate, or direct, having a robust 
technology foundation can improve the management of potentially resource-intensive 
activities such as fund accounting.

— Risk management. Technology and AI can help institutions move to an exception-based risk 
management model, automating repeatable checks so that risk teams can focus on the most 
complex and critical areas. Institutions that have not invested adequately to mature their 
technology capabilities can face increasing risks, such as growing cybersecurity 
vulnerabilities, operational risk associated with poor data quality, and limited ability to 
respond rapidly to market events.

Many institutional investors remain behind the digital curve. We see investors using 
spreadsheets and emails for tasks that could be automated, such as managing portfolio 
performance and investment compliance. They tend to struggle with outdated core systems, 
such as their investment book of record (IBOR), that slow decision-making. They may also face 
data quality and granularity challenges, both in their current portfolio and new investments in 
emerging asset classes such as private credit, which may not be supported by the current state 
of private-markets technology.

In our experience, these challenges are often either due to insufficient spending or investors’ 
inability to make a clear prioritization case to their boards and stakeholders. Consider these data 
points: In 2022, the average large institutional investor spent between 1.3 and 2.7 basis points 
on technology and AI. In other words, an institutional investor with $150 billion in assets under 
management had an annual technology budget of approximately $20 million to $40 million.1 
This spend has increased by about 20 percent in absolute dollars since 2020, with an estimated 
incremental 10 percent increase in 2023.2

Some investors spend more on technology and AI: Those who spent the most—the top 25 
percent—were spending upward of 3.5 basis points (Exhibit 1).

1  CEM Investment Benchmarking, 2022.
2 CEM Data & Systems Benchmarking, 2023.

Unlocking value from technology and AI for institutional investors

3

Exhibit 1

Higher spending is correlated with three factors: a higher percentage of assets managed in-
house, a higher percentage of assets allocated to private assets, and a greater number of staff 
focused on risk management.

A new approach to building, deploying, and managing technology 
and AI

To make technology a priority agenda item for boards and stakeholders, institutional investors 
may also need to reexamine their approach. Historically, there were two common approaches, 
and both were beset by a number of challenges. Some investors adopted a more conservative 
stance and incrementally improved (and invested in) their technology capabilities, as and when 
required. This approach was likely to create fragmentation, growing technology debt, and 
friction over time. In the absence of a holistic technology strategy, these investments were also 
more likely to get funneled to maintenance. 

Unlocking value from technology and AI for institutional investors

4

In the second approach, investors launched multiyear transformation programs with a “waterfall” 
delivery style, for example, building new IBOR platforms and a fully-fledged data warehouse. We 
found that these programs could lose steam over time due to increasing costs and the lack of 
measurable impact early in the transformation.

Leading institutions are taking a new and fundamentally different approach. Based on our work 
in this area, there are six steps that leading investors have taken to rewire their organizations 
and implement successful technology transformations.

Define technology aspirations in alignment with investment objectives
In our view, institutional investors fall into one of three archetypes regarding their technology 
aspirations: leading-edge innovator, close follower, and minimum viable maintainer. Many 
investors historically operated as minimum viable maintainers; since they believed technology 
had limited potential to enhance investment outcomes, they only developed the bare minimum 
capabilities. With time, these institutions have realized that they could not react to new 
opportunities and market shifts as quickly as they would have liked, and also faced 
compounding technology debt.

We believe institutions would do well to change their mindsets and become close followers, if 
not leading-edge innovators of technology and AI. To do this, they should first set long-term 
aspirations for their technology strategy so they can put all their resources and entire 
organization behind the vision.

Strengthen the technology foundation
Leading institutions have invested in modernizing and future-proofing their IT foundation, 
upgrading core investment platforms, and deploying AI tools to improve data processes. They 
have also made data a strategic asset instead of being merely a by-product of operations.

Reimagine and integrate core investment platforms. Investment teams have been using IBOR 
platforms for data management, risk, and compliance processing, among other tasks, but they 
often encounter challenges (Exhibit 2). For instance, legacy platforms tend to struggle with 
integrating disparate data across asset types and products. And many institutions lack a 
supporting platform for newer asset classes such as private debt. Custom work-arounds built 
around legacy IBOR solutions can also create friction and risk (for example, incorrectly keying in 
a transaction amount).

Leading institutions are modernizing their legacy IBOR platforms and unwinding custom work-
arounds to simplify platform upgrades and reduce platform lock-in. They are also establishing a 
total fund view by investing in a total fund platform or a data platform that integrates data from 
different asset-class-focused IBORs.

Unlocking value from technology and AI for institutional investors

5

Exhibit 2

Successfully modernizing or building IBORs is often a complex task. Some institutions have 
surpassed their budgets and timelines to modernize their technology platforms, only to get 
limited benefits. Investors are more likely to succeed if they can reimagine their investment and 
operations processes hand in hand with platform modernization. For example, they could design 
an optimized private assets process from sourcing to diligence to investment finalization and 
operations, and then appropriately tailor an IBOR platform (and potential custom applications).

Use AI to create value. A variety of use cases of AI in the investment sector are well 
documented. Leading pensions are using gen AI to rapidly synthesize internal and external 
knowledge or distill thousands of private asset documents for more efficient investment 
decision-making (see sidebar, “How a leading North American pension tapped into the power of 
AI and data”). Some investors are also exploring external partnerships to advance their AI 
capabilities.

Unlocking value from technology and AI for institutional investors

6

.

How a leading North American pension tapped into the power of 
AI and data

A North American pension developed a proprietary gen AI model that draws on aggregated internal 
and external data to support research, thesis development, deal sourcing, and portfolio exposure 
analytics, among other tasks. To achieve this, it invested in the underlying data platform to develop a 
firmwide production-level environment. Then, it identified and structured the most critical sources of 
internal and external data (for example, investment memos, proprietary research, corporate filings, 
and analyst reports), which were aggregated into robust data assets in a cloud-based data lake. The 
pension also modernized its approach to data management with centrally defined standards and 
robust accountability and ownership across organizational units.

The investor also did a few other things right: having a clear vision of the end goal and communicating 
it to all relevant stakeholders, conducting training across roles and user groups for more efficient 
adoption, and iterating with investment teams to tailor the developed use cases to their needs.

Within the first 12 months of this exercise, the investor achieved rapid adoption across the company. 
The gen AI model also helped the investor achieve meaningful performance differentiation through 
quicker assessment of novel investment strategies and quantifying of investment risk in creative 
ways.

While 2024 saw spikes in worldwide gen AI adoption, the institutional investing industry 
continues to lag behind its financial-services-industry peers. Based on CEM Benchmarking’s 
recent research, less than 20 percent of participants indicated they were ready to incorporate AI 
and other future technologies (Exhibit 2).

Treat data as a strategic asset versus a byproduct of operations. Although a majority of the 
institutions surveyed by CEM Benchmarking reported having dedicated data teams, many 
lacked robust data governance practices and reported low satisfaction with their data strategy. 
For example, only 18 percent said their front office teams could get timely data access without 
manual intervention, as shown in Exhibit 2.

Unlocking value from technology and AI for institutional investors

7

Leading institutions are taking three actions to make data a strategic asset: 1) establishing data 
governance tools and processes (for example, for data quality, metadata) with clear 
responsibilities and new roles such as data stewards and data owners (and, in some cases, 
leveraging AI and gen AI to enable data governance); 2) building or maturing a data platform that 
integrates data across sources into high-value data products and serves as a single source of 
truth for all data consumers; and 3) optimizing procurement of third-party data to integrate new 
sources (such as for ESG), right-size consumption, and improve commercial arrangements.

Reimagine the approach to technology and AI delivery
Once the technology foundation has been built, leading institutions build a collaborative 
operating model and adopt an iterative test-and-learn approach for their technology initiatives 
to manage costs.

Implement a collaborative operating model. In the past, the technology team was considered a 
support function for investment and operations teams, working behind the scenes to address 
issues, which often led to fragmented solutions, subpar solutions, and technology debt.

Investors are now recognizing the importance of aligning with and prioritizing technology 
capabilities in service of the investment strategy and ensuring technology spend has 
measurable outcomes and benefits. Institutions are also starting small instead of trying to 
transform every part of the organization—by selecting one or two focus areas for conducting 
minimal viable product (MVP) testing and training investment teams.

Establish integrated delivery teams that cut across firm functions. Leading institutions are 
developing integrated deployment teams with members from the investment, operations, and 
technical-delivery teams. For example, some investors staff a specific team for three to six 
months to build an MVP of an AI-powered model to improve liquidity management. The team 
has a product owner, subject matter experts from the total fund team, a tech lead, scrum master, 
and data engineers and scientists from the technology domain. The team would co-locate and 
establish a series of forums (for instance, daily stand-ups, backlog planning, demos, and retros) 
to jointly develop and refine the use case. Some investors have extended this concept further by 
embedding technology staff, such as data scientists, within the investment teams (roughly 10 
percent of technology staff, on average, according to CEM Benchmarking’s research3). 
Institutions keen on this approach would do well to avoid overfragmentation in the technology 
team to ensure central oversight and adherence to standards, architectural alignment, and risk 
management.

Create early and ongoing value with iterative deployment. Building lasting technological 
transformation at scale often requires organizations to undertake larger and costlier initiatives 
over multiple years. In our experience, many executives can struggle with maintaining 
consistency in such initiatives, given cost and time considerations.

3 CEM Data & Systems Benchmarking, 2023.

Unlocking value from technology and AI for institutional investors

8

Some investors overcome these issues by breaking large initiatives into their component parts 
and iteratively deploying them. Instead of embarking on a two-year data warehouse program 
(when value gets generated only on the back end), for example, investors take two to three 
months to instantiate the environment, followed by three-month bursts to build and deploy MVP 
data products and AI use cases. They then scale in subsequent three-month bursts to mature 
the data products and use cases and extend to new ones. This approach can build momentum 
early in the process, allow for regular user feedback, and offset costs with value creation over 
time.

While adopting this approach, investors are expected to ensure that near-term speed doesn’t 
come at the expense of future scalability. They can do this by making sure the iterative releases 
adhere to a target state architecture and vision, and by tracking their technology debt.

Revisit the talent model
Many institutions struggle to attract and retain technologists who have sufficient investing 
knowledge. To solve for this, some investors lean on outsourcing, while others temper their 
technology aspirations to match available talent.

Investors who want to build internal capabilities are elevating technology and AI roles in their 
organization by establishing a clear value proposition, creating development pathways, and, in 
some cases, ensuring more competitive compensation for such roles. To complement this 
approach, they also invest in skill building for all staff, covering technical disciplines as well as 
the essentials of investing. Several institutions are also revisiting and optimizing their sourcing 
model: insourcing strategically differentiating roles such as data scientists and technology 
architects; outsourcing more repeatable activities such as reporting; and forming strategic 
partnerships (to accelerate delivery in the near term as the internal bench grows, or integrate 
available third-party technology and AI offerings).

Identify and mitigate risks
Investors are also expected to be mindful of potential technology risks, including cybersecurity 
breaches, data risks (for example, poor data quality leading to suboptimal decisions), operational 
risks (such as a core platform going down and preventing trading), third-party risks (for instance, 
an IBOR provider making a mistake in its calculations), and legal and compliance issues (for 
example, not adhering to third-party data use agreements). Adoption of gen AI also comes with 
its own challenges, including potential hallucinations of patterns and other biases.

More forward-leaning investors are investing time and resources to identify such risks and 
implement and ideally automate monitoring of these systems as a mitigation measure. Some 
investors work closely with third-party platform providers, outsourced service providers, and 
strategic partners for more robust monitoring and controls.

Unlocking value from technology and AI for institutional investors

9

Emphasize change management to propel adoption at every step
To capture lasting value from technology and AI, leading investors embed technology in their 
core investment and operational processes and shift the way staff work. Getting this right isn’t 
easy. For example, while most participants in CEM Benchmarking’s survey reported working on 
gen AI or machine learning proofs of concept, only a few have made meaningful progress in 
adopting these tools for daily use.

Institutions that succeed in the transition (such as the North American pension in our case 
study) think about change management before technical delivery starts (for example, by 
understanding users’ needs and concerns and designing future-state processes explicitly to use 
the technology). They have strong communication and backing from the leadership team. They 
start with a clear change story and value proposition and adequately invest in training staff to 
help propel initial adoption. And to ensure that adoption sticks, they stay close to users to 
rapidly address any questions or issues, offer further training, and constantly seek feedback for 
improvement.

What now? Decisive actions for growth

Institutional investors can take three actions to understand where they are with technology and 
AI and chart an accelerated path forward. They can assess their current (technological) strategy 
and participate in peer benchmarking to understand the technology and AI maturity across the 
organization. Next, they can refresh their technology strategy; solidify future aspirations, 
funding, and team head count; and ensure resources are aligned to the highest-value 
investment and operational needs (for example, scaling private assets investments and 
improving total fund management). And, last but not least, they can actively explore 
opportunities to leapfrog progress using new capabilities. For example, instead of waiting for a 
fully fledged data warehouse or data lake to start developing insights, investors can begin 
extracting transaction data from core platforms (such as IBORs) and using gen AI to query it.

Technology has immense value potential for institutional investors. It can enhance investment 
returns and improve operational efficiency and risk management, among other long-term gains. 
But to achieve these gains, investors must be willing to do the hard work of overhauling how 
their institutions run.

Bryan Petzold is a partner in McKinsey’s Bay Area office; Elizabeth Skovira is a partner in the Boston office; 
Frédéric Jacques is a partner in the Montreal office, where Marcos Tarnowski is a senior partner and Jérémie 
Guay is a consultant; Piyush Sharma is a partner in the New York office, where Akshat Kumar is an expert 
associate partner; Raj Bector is a senior partner in the Washington, DC, office; and Ragi Ragavan is an associate 
partner in the Detroit office.

This article was edited by Arshiya Khullar, an editor in the Gurugram office.

Copyright © 2025 McKinsey & Company. All rights reserved.

Unlocking value from technology and AI for institutional investors

10

